* Background

A Gauss curve is defined by the function:

  <math>\phi(t) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi}} \exp(-t^2/2)</math>

The normal distribution is a function which is widely used in
statistics. It is defined as the integral of the Gauss curve:

  <math>\Phi(x) = \int_{-\infty}^x \phi(t) dt</math>

We know that <math>\Phi(\infty) = 1</math> (the integral from
<math>-\infty</math> to <math>\infty</math>). The Gauss function is
symmetrical so we can rewrite the integral as:

  <math>\Phi(x) = \frac{1}{2} + \int_0^x \phi(t) dt</math>

(since the complete integral equals <math>1</math>), and we get rid of
the infinity.

Now, the big issue here is that <math>\Phi(x)</math> cannot be
calculated analytically; it can only be approximated. Your program
will do this approximation.

* Task

Write a program that asks the user for an integer <math>n</math> and a
floating-point value <math>x</math>. Calculate <math>\Phi(x)</math> by
adding together the areas of small rectangles defined below for
<math>n</math> intervals between <math>0</math> and <math>x</math>. We
consider the height of the rectangle to be the value of
<math>\phi</math> at the midpoint. Thus, the area of one of these
rectangles is:

  <math>A(a,b) = \phi(\frac{a+b}{2}) (b-a)</math>

where <math>a</math> and <math>b</math> are the start and end values
on the x-axis of the small interval.

Since you have to divide the distance between <math>0</math> and
<math>x</math> into <math>n</math> intervals, it is easy to calculate
<math>a</math> and <math>b</math> for interval number <math>i</math>
(where <math>0 \leq i < n</math>):

  <math>a = \frac{ix}{n}</math>

  <math>b = \frac{(i+1)x}{n}</math>

Remember that you need to add up these small rectangular areas and the
value <math>1/2</math> since we are using the modified integral above.

You must write a separate function for <math>\phi(t)</math> and
<math>A(a,b)</math>. Both functions will return a =double=.

* Examples

<example>
Enter n and x: 5 2.0
Area under the curve: 0.977966262206
</example>

<example>
Enter n and x: 1000 2.0
Area under the curve: 0.977249890119
</example>

<example>
Enter n and x: 10 0.5
Area under the curve: 0.691480803321
</example>

<example>
Enter n and x: 1000 0.5
Area under the curve: 0.691462464741
</example>

<example>
Enter n and x: 1000000 0.5
Area under the curve: 0.691462462907
</example>

<example>
Enter n and x: 1000000 -0.285
Area under the curve: 0.387822070006
</example>

* Make your own examples

Go to this site: [[http://people.hofstra.edu/Stefan_Waner/RealWorld/integral/integral.html]]

Enter this formula: =1/sqrt(2*pi) * exp(-x^2/2)=

Use left-end-point: -50, right-end-point: (whatever you want), and
click Adaptive Quadrature. Your answer should be close.

<include file="academic-misconduct.txt">


