* Task

Write a complete program that asks the user for an input filename and
an output filename. Your program will open the input file and read
values (doubles) from the file. At the top of the file will be an
integer representing how many doubles are in the file. The doubles in
the input file will be scattered, with weird spacing and such (see
example below). Your program will read these values and save them into
the output file with one value per line (with precision 3). Thus, your
program will bascially "clean up" the input file.

Example input file:

<example>
    13   3.4087     68.472
382.674 69.3 16.435000   04.4682 283.57372
  23.54 734 2    3     45 3.00
</example>

Output file (which your program creates):

<example>
3.409
68.472
382.674
69.300
16.435
4.468
283.574
23.540
734.000
2.000
3.000
45.000
3.000
</example>

Your program should check if the input file can be opened. If it
cannot, it should give an error:

<example>
Enter input filename: oogabooga.txt
Enter output filename: results.txt
Error opening input file.
</example>

Same with the output file; if the output file cannot be opened, there
should be an error:

<example>
Enter input filename: input.txt
Enter output filename: not-a-real-directory/blah.txt
Error opening output file.
</example>

To test your program, copy the input file shown above and paste it in
a new file (or just make your own; remember the first number in the
file is an integer representing how many numbers follow). Then run
your program and specify that file when your program asks for the
input filename. When the program is done, open the output file to see
if you have the right results. Try modifying the input file for
different tests (e.g. add more spaces, change some numbers).

<include file="academic-misconduct.txt">
