OSU describes this course as

  Introduction to computer programming and to problem solving
  techniques using computer programs with applications in engineering
  and the physical sciences; algorithm development; programming lab
  experience.

I describe this course as

  Introduction to the C++ programming language and programming lab
  experience; problem solving and "computational thinking" taught in
  the context of learning C++ and building basic interactive programs.

The point is that what you'll take away from this class is "I learned
basic C++ programming" but what we *want* you to take away from this
class is "I learned how to program computers" which requires you learn
how to work within their limitations and take advantage of their
capabilities.

C++ is a very "low level" language, by today's standards, which means
you have to do a lot of tasks "the hard way." More modern programming
languages (e.g. Python, Ruby, etc.) are more convenient for quick
programming projects. But we'll try to use the "special" nature of C++
to learn what we can about programming in general.

* Prerequisites

Math 151 (Calculus I) is required, though we'll use little if any
Calculus.

* Textbook

*Engineering Problem Solving with C++* by Etter & Ingber -- please buy
the first edition (save your money!) ([[http://www.amazon.com/Engineering-Problem-Solving-Delores-Etter/dp/0130912662][Amazon link]])

Note that the textbook *is not required*. Nothing is required reading
beyond my lecture notes.

* Assignments and grading

You will have two assignments per week: 1 easy (called a "Lab"), 1
"normal difficulty" (called an "Assignment"). These aren't big
projects, they are just small tasks that force you to use a concept
from class.

You will also be required to answer a few questions every week in the
"Quiz" section on Carmen. These quizzes should take very little time
(you have at most 1 hour to complete them), consist of 3-4 questions,
and just serve to ensure everybody is paying attention.

There are three midterms: the first is on-paper, in-class; the second
is in the computer lab; the third is the Final exam.

Grade distribution:

  - Labs: 10%

  - Assignments: 20%

  - Quizzes: 10%

  - Midterm 1 (on-paper, in-class): 15%

  - Midterm 2 (programming in lab): 20%

  - Midterm 3 (Final exam, on-paper, in-class): 25%

The midterms are designed not to be any harder than the
labs/assignments/quizzes.

I usually provide extra credit in some form. I'm sure it will happen
again, but I'm not sure yet in what form.

* Due dates, late work

Every week is the same:

  - Weekly Lab due Friday by midnight

  - Weekly Assignment due Friday by midnight

  - Weekly quiz must be completed by Friday by midnight

Late work is only accepted for the Assignments. You can turn an
Assignment in up to one week late. You will suffer a 20% grade penalty
for late work.

* Attendance

I do not require attendance, except for the days we have the midterms
(of course). The class is designed so that you don't have to come
every day; there are always "events" in our lives that take us away
from school. However, I want you to come to lecture, and you'll surely
benefit (sometimes people forget the midterm dates; if you come to
class, you won't forget!). All the lecture material and homework are
online.

Attendance is also not required on the lab days (Tuesdays), *however*,
most people benefit from coming to lab because they get their work
done and have their questions answered. Also, *the second midterm takes
place in the lab* so you must know how to use the lab computers (Linux)
to succeed.

I try to avoid giving students who are in class more information than
those who are not in class, but of course that happens (students ask
questions, I go on tangents in lecture, etc.). However, if I announce
extra credit or whatever then I'll make sure everybody knows.

* Academic misconduct policy

This is a school setting, so we have to abide by the normal
"individual work" clause:

  All writing (prose) and coding for every one of the programming
  assignments, labs, and quizzes is to be done individually. DO NOT
  LOOK AT OR COPY anyone else's writing or code. DO NOT SHARE your
  writing or code with anyone else. The only code you can copy is what
  you see in the book and what I provide to you (in class or on this
  website). If you are stuck on an assignment or lab, please visit me
  (or another TA) during office hours. Suspected cases of academic
  misconduct will be filed with the Committee of Academic Misconduct.
