* Task

Write a program that asks for three decimal numbers (<math>a</math>,
<math>b</math>, and <math>c</math>) and prints a message indicating
whether the quadratic equation <math>ax^2+bx+c=0</math> has no
solutions, one solution, two solutions, or no real solutions (only
imaginary solutions). Your program will need to make use of several if
statements. Nest the =if= statements appropriately so that you do not
test for a condition twice (e.g., you must test <math>a=0</math> only
once, not five times). Here is the algorithm:

  - If <math>a=0</math> and <math>b=0</math>, then there is no solution
    (output =No solution.=).

  - If <math>a=0</math> and <math>b \neq 0</math>, then there is one
    solution.

  - If <math>a \neq 0</math> and <math>b^2-4ac = 0</math>, then there is
    one solution.

  - If <math>a \neq 0</math> and <math>b^2-4ac > 0</math>, then there
    are two solutions.

  - If <math>a \neq 0</math> and <math>b^2-4ac < 0</math>, then there
    are no real solutions, i.e. two imaginary solutions.

* Examples

Be sure your program works with the following examples:

<example>
Enter values for a, b, and c: 0 0 7
No solution.
</example>

<example>
Enter values for a, b, and c: 0 0 38.8
No solution.
</example>

<example>
Enter values for a, b, and c: 0 0.5 2
One solution.
</example>

<example>
Enter values for a, b, and c: 1 -6 9
One solution.
</example>

<example>
Enter values for a, b, and c: 1 -3 2
Two solutions.
</example>

<example>
Enter values for a, b, and c: 0.1 -2.5 15
Two solutions.
</example>

<example>
Enter values for a, b, and c: 1 0 1
Two imaginary solutions.
</example>

<example>
Enter values for a, b, and c: 2 -4 3
Two imaginary solutions.
</example>

* Academic misconduct policy

All writing (prose) and coding for every one of the programming
assignments and labs is to be done individually. DO NOT LOOK AT OR
COPY anyone else's writing or code. DO NOT SHARE your writing or code
with anyone else. The only code you can copy is what you see in the
book and what I provide to you (in class or on this website). If you
are stuck on an assignment or lab, please visit me (or another TA)
during office hours. Suspected cases of academic misconduct will be
filed with the Committee of Academic Misconduct.
